[0041] New proposal for `testing-maximal-reconvergence` (#376)
llvm/wg-hlsl: proposals/0039-testing-maximal-reconvergence.md

* Issues: [Implementation in
  Clang](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/136930)

## Introduction

This proposal seeks to add comprehensive conformance tests that HLSL compilers
(DXC and Clang) do not violate the optimization restrictions in section [1.6.3
of the HLSL
specification](https://microsoft.github.io/hlsl-specs/specs/hlsl.pdf?#page=9).

## Motivation

Graphics compilers often perform aggressive optimizations that can unexpectedly
alter the state of a thread in a wave. This is a critical issue for shaders
containing operations dependent on which threads are active, such as wave
intrinsics, as invalid transformations can lead to wrong or indeterminate
results. Historically, there is only an [informal
definition](https://github.com/microsoft/directxshadercompiler/wiki/wave-intrinsics#operation)
of which threads should be active at any point in execution of the shader:
"<i>implementations must enforce that the number of active lanes exactly
corresponds to the programmer’s view of flow control</i>". 

When lowering HLSL to SPIR-V, we must make sure the output matches this
expectation. To do so, there are 2 areas that need to be looked at:

> #### 1. Adding `SPV_KHR_maximal_reconvergence` extension and `MaximallyReconvergesKHR` capability.

Reviewer: Mention that this is Vulkan specific.

This is an indicator for the driver compilers to respect the above requirement
downstream. The frontend compilers will append these instructions if the
`-fspv-enable-maximal-reconvergence` flag is set.

#### 2. Ensuring the frontend compilers themselves do not alter the state during optimizations.

This is the place that needs extensive testing. In the below example, a compiler
may reorder the code (e.g loop unswitch pass) so that statements are moved
inside the branches, producing incorrect results.

| Before Optmization | After Optimization |
| --- | --- |

> | <pre><code>if (non_uniform_cond) {<br>   doA(); <br>} else {<br>   doB(); <br>}<br>// Expected converged. <br>Out[...] = waveOperations(); </code></pre>| <pre><code>if (non_uniform_cond) {<br>   doA(); <br>   // Invalid transformation <br>   Out[...] = waveOperations();<br>} else {<br>   doB(); <br>   // Invalid transformation <br>   Out[...] = waveOperations(); <br>}<br></code></pre> |

Reviewer: This is an example of an invalid transformation. However is that the transformation that is actually done? Usually it goes the other way. This is called Tail merging and it is part of SimplifyCFG.

The `e.g.` above makes it seem like you were going to give an example of loop unswitching.

This kind of optimization should be prevented, and in DXC, SPIR-V is used for
optimizing, so the instructions such as  `OpSelectionMerge` and `OpLoopMerge`
explicitly indicate a merge point and help avoid those control flow
modifications.

In Clang, we leverage [control convergence
tokens](https://llvm.org/docs/ConvergentOperations.html#overview) within the IR,
to explicitly mark the convergent operations (i.e. waves) and the convergence
points of the threads executing those instructions, so that optimization passes
can be aware and avoid invalid transformations.

Testing for correct convergence behavior is critical for reliability. Currently,
only a few unit tests exist. We need to extend this coverage to include complex
and highly divergent cases.

## Proposed solution

We propose implementing a comprehensive test suite in the offload-test-suite
repository that mirrors the logic of the Vulkan Conformance Testing Suite
(Vulkan-CTS). This involves generating shaders with random control flows (mixes
of if/switch statements, loops, and nesting) and verifying the results.

### Shader Generation

> Approximately _N_ number of  HLSL shaders will be generated. These shaders use

Reviewer: Are you going to replace N with a real number? Otherwise, I don't think you need to mention the number of shader. Focus on how they will be generated.

fixed input buffers and write results to output buffers, where randomness is
derived from branching logic.

### CPU Simulation

A CPU simulation will track active thread indices and calculate the expected
result of wave operations based on specific subgroup sizes.

### Verification

We will generate a set of yaml test files for the offload-test-suite. For each
shader and subgroup size (4, 8, 16, 32), a test file will be generated that
executes the shader and verifies that the results match the CPU simulation.

## Detailed design

[This](https://github.com/llvm/offload-test-suite/pull/685) is an example of the
proposed design.

> ### Test Generation and Simulation

Reviewer: You might want to fix up the order here. The test generation include the simulation. Here is an example of how I would lay it out. Fill in the text. I just have a few points on what should be included.

### Test Generation

#### Random shaders

// Move the "Transation" section here.
Explicitly call out the intermediate form for the shader, and describe it a bit.

#### Expected results

// Mention how you will pick the size of the buffer, which is determine by a "dry run" in vulkan.
// Mention that you will get the expected results for each wave size doing a CPU simulation
Mention that the CPU simulation will be done on the intermediate form and not the final SPIR-V shader.

#### Final test file

// Explain how the find test case will be generated. This can be short as it is simply taking the info from the other step. Say where the new tests will be stored.

Since each GPU has different subgroup sizes, each machine will have a version
for every power-of-2 wave size between 4 and 32 (e.g., 4, 8, 16, 32). The tests
that do not match the subgroup size of the running GPU will be skipped (e.g.
through `# UNSUPPORTED: !SubgroupSizeX` directive).

### Translation

Logic from [Vulkan CTS GLSL
generation](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/VK-GL-CTS/blob/main/external/vulkancts/modules/vulkan/reconvergence/vktReconvergenceTests.cpp)
will be ported to produce HLSL. This includes translating intrinsics such as
`subgroupElect()` to `WaveIsFirstLane()` and `subgroupBallot()` to
`WaveActiveBallot()`, etc.

### Execution Pipeline

Only the code for the **random test generator** will reside in the
offload-test-suite repository. The shaders will be generated as part of the
pipeline. 

New steps will be added to the existing workflow at the end.

- Build DXC
- Build LLVM
- Dump GPU Info
- Run HLSL Tests
- **Generate Random Reconvergence Tests**
- **Run Reconvergence Tests**

This way, the execution of existing HLSL tests and the reconvergence tests are
separated.

```yaml

> # .github/workflows/build-and-test-callable.yaml

Reviewer: A github workflow? Will I be able to run them locally? I think we should have a cmake target to be able to run the tests locally.

- name: Generate maximal Reconvergence Tests
  continue-on-error: true
  if: always()
  run: |
      rm -rf OffloadTest/tools/TestGenerator/reconvergence/tests/*
      cd OffloadTest/tools/TestGenerator/reconvergence
      cmake -G Ninja -B build/
      ninja -C build
- name: Run Maximal Reconvergence Test
  continue-on-error: true
  if: always()
  env:
      OFFLOADTEST_SUPPRESS_DIFF: 1
  run: |
      cd llvm-project
      cd build
      ./bin/llvm-lit -v --xunit-xml-output=testresults-max-reconv.xunit.xml ${{ github.workspace }}/OffloadTest/tools/TestGenerator/reconvergence/tests
      
```

We don't plan to store the physical test files in the repo. Developers can still
run the tests locally by running the test generator to output the tests in their
machine.

### Reporting

We may implment an environment variable `OFFLOADTEST_SUPPRESS_DIFF` to filter

> out some logs, since for example, diffs will be massive for a failing test.

Reviewer: I looked at the tests closer. Not all tests use filecheck. The ones you created did not.

Something else we can do it so make use arrays of resources. See the "array-global.test" test. Instead of having a single output buffer, the output buffer is an array, where each thread writes to its own buffer.

RWStructuredBuffer<uint4> OutputB : register(u1);

becomes

RWStructuredBuffer<uint4> OutputB[NUM_THREADS] : register(u1);

Then 

OutputB[(outLoc++)*invocationStride + gIndex].x = 0x10002;

becomes

OutputB[gIndex][(outLoc++)].x = 0x10002;

Then you can have a CHECK line for each thread. The size of each line will be much smaller. I one test it would be only 100 values per line, and it if failed it would give a diff pointing to the incorrect value. 

We could try to figure out a way to  modify the indices. Instead of using `outLoc++`, we can use a formula with some constants so that we easily know which line and which iterations of any containing loop was suppose to have written to that location with the given loop iterations. This last part might be a bit forward looking. Not needed now. These are the types of things we can do to make the test easier to debug.

---

> title: "0039 - Testing Maximal Reconvergence"

Reviewer 2: Careful, a proposal 39 was committed while this was in review. Looks like you'll need to update to 41

results. Historically, there is only an [informal
definition](https://github.com/microsoft/directxshadercompiler/wiki/wave-intrinsics#operation)
of which threads should be active at any point in execution of the shader:
"<i>implementations must enforce that the number of active lanes exactly
corresponds to the programmer’s view of flow control</i>". 

When lowering HLSL to SPIR-V, we must make sure the output matches this
expectation. To do so, there are 2 areas that need to be looked at:

#### 1. Adding `SPV_KHR_maximal_reconvergence` extension and `MaximallyReconvergesKHR` capability. These are Vulkan-specific.

This is an indicator for the driver compilers to respect the above requirement
downstream. The frontend compilers will append these instructions if the
`-fspv-enable-maximal-reconvergence` flag is set.

#### 2. Ensuring the frontend compilers themselves do not alter the state during optimizations.

This is the place that needs extensive testing. In the example below, a compiler
may reorder the code (e.g SimplifyCFG pass) so that statements are moved
inside the branches, producing incorrect results.

| Before Optmization | After Optimization |
| --- | --- |

> | <pre><code>if (non_uniform_cond) {<br>   doA(); <br>   Out[...] = waveOperations();<br>} else {<br>   doB(); <br>   Out[...] = waveOperations(); <br>}<br></code></pre> |  <pre><code>if (non_uniform_cond) {<br>   doA(); <br>} else {<br>   doB(); <br>} <br> // Invalid transformation. <br> Out[...] = waveOperations(); </code></pre> |

Reviewer 2: This is really hard to read as text, and previewing it on github I think it's ignoring the `<br>`s, so it's hard to read that way too. Probably better to just do a before and after codeblock consecutively instead of trying to render these side by side.

Author: Separated.

wave sizes need different expected results. It's not easy to know the wave size
at the test generation step, since it will require setting up a Graphics
pipeline to query the value.

Therefore, we will prepare the tests in all possible wave sizes (every
power-of-2 between 4 and 32, i.e. 4, 8, 16, 32) and have the test pipeline skip
those that do not match the wave size at test runtime. We will implement
`WaveSizeX` directive and append this condition in the test files. As an
example, a GPU with wave size 32 will have `# UNSUPPORTED: !WaveSize32`.

### Workflow Trigger

Only the code for the **random test generator** will reside in the
offload-test-suite repository. The shaders will be generated as part of the
pipeline. 

#### CMake Target 

We will implement a cmake target `check-hlsl-{platform}-reconvergence`, similar
to the existing targets. Running this will generate the physical tests and run
them.

#### Github Workflow

New steps will be added to the existing workflow at the end:

- Build DXC
- Build LLVM
- Dump GPU Info
- Run HLSL Tests
- **Run Reconvergence Tests**

This way, the execution of existing HLSL tests and the reconvergence tests are

> separated.

Reviewer 2: I assume this is just for ease of reporting / seeing what needs to be investigated? Might be worth explicitly stating why separating the tests matters.

---
title: "0039 - Testing Maximal Reconvergence"
draft: true
params:
  authors:
    - luciechoi: Lucie Choi
  sponsors:
    - s-perron: Steven Perron
    - Keenuts: Nathan Gauër
  status: Under Consideration
---

* PRs: [Testing in offload-test-suite (Draft)](https://github.com/llvm/offload-test-suite/pull/620)
* Issues:
  [Implementation in Clang](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/136930)

## Introduction

> This proposal seeks to add comprehensive conformance tests for the maximal reconvergence feature in HLSL compilers (DXC and Clang).

Reviewer: The term "maximal reconvergence" is not an HLSL term. It is a SPIR-V term. We should say something more like:

```suggestion
This proposal seeks to add comprehensive conformance tests that HLSL compilers (DXC and Clang) do not violate the optimization restrictions in section 1.6.3 of the HLSL specification.
```

## Motivation

Graphics compilers often perform aggressive optimizations that can unexpectedly alter the convergence behavior of threads within a wave. This is a critical issue for shaders containing operations dependent on control flow, such as wave intrinsics, as invalid transformations can lead to wrong or indeterminate results.

Maximal reconvergence is a set of compiler guarantees designed to prevent these unintended changes, ensuring that divergent threads reconverge at expected merge points and that wave operations execute in lockstep where intended.

> This feature is fully implemented in DirectXCompiler and LLVM, and testing for correct convergence behavior is critical for reliability. Currently, only a few unit tests exist. We need to extend this coverage to include complex and highly divergent cases.

Reviewer: I would drop the first sentence. The state of the implementation is irrelevant to the motivation.

### CPU Simulation

A CPU simulation will track active thread indices and calculate the expected result of wave operations based on specific subgroup sizes.

### Verification

The generated shaders will follow the offload-test-suite format. The shaders will be executed on the GPU, and the resulting output buffers will be compared against the CPU-simulated expectations to verify correctness.

## Detailed design

### Test Generation and Simulation
The shaders will be generated when the test pipeline starts. Since each GPU has different subgroup sizes, each machine will have a version for every power-of-2 wave size between 4 and 32 (e.g., 4, 8, 16, 32). The tests that do not match the subgroup size of the running GPU will be skipped (e.g. through `# UNSUPPORTED: !SubgroupSizeX` directive).

### Translation

Logic from [Vulkan CTS GLSL generation](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/VK-GL-CTS/blob/main/external/vulkancts/modules/vulkan/reconvergence/vktReconvergenceTests.cpp) will be ported to produce HLSL. This includes translating intrinsics such as `subgroupElect()` to `WaveIsFirstLane()` and `subgroupBallot()` to `WaveActiveBallot()`, etc.

> ### Execution Pipeline

Author: Thanks for pointing out. I've added an example workflow. 

Here is the new draft PR with workflow changes. https://github.com/llvm/offload-test-suite/pull/685

> Only the code for the **random shader generator** will reside in the offload-test-suite repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only the code for the **random test generator** will reside in the offload-test-suite repository.
```

### Latency

The entire Vulkan-CTS test (~1500 shaders) takes ~10 seconds to complete, so the test generation + execution time should be similar and should not significantly affect the current pipeline duration. We may also choose to start with smaller iterations (~100 shaders).

### Reporting

> Results of the reconvergence tests will be aggregated. Failing shaders will be logged separately or made available via YAML artifacts to avoid diluting logs with excessive data.

Reviewer: does this mean that the tests that pass will be deleted? where will the failing test be saved?
